New page: menu role (#12650)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/accessibility/aria/roles/menu_role/index.md

```html
<div>
  <button type="button" aria-haspopup="menu" aria-controls="colormenu" tabindex="0" aria-label="Text Color: purple">
    Purple
    <span></span>
  </button>
  <ul role="menu" id="colormenu" aria-label="Color Options" tabindex="-1">
    <li role="menuitemradio" aria-checked="true" style="color: purple" tabindex="-1">Purple</li>
    <li role="menuitemradio" aria-checked="false" style="color: magenta" tabindex="-1">Magenta</li>
    <li role="menuitemradio" aria-checked="false" style="color: black;" tabindex="-1">Black</li>
  </ul>
</div>
```

The button that opens the menu has [`aria-haspopup="menu"`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Attributes/aria-haspopup) set, explicitly indicating that the popup it controls is a `menu`.

For a menu to open, the user generally interacts with a menu button as the opener. The menu button must be focusable and respond to both click and keyboard events. When focused, selecting <kbd>Enter</kbd>, <kbd>Space</kbd>, <kbd>Down Arrow</kbd>, or the <kbd>Up Arrow</kbd> should open the menu and place focus on a menu item.  

> The opening and closing of the menu toggles the [`aria-expanded="true"`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Attributes/aria-expanded) attribute on the button. It is added when the menu is open. Removed or set to `false` when the menu is closed. The `true` value indicates that the menu is displayed and that activating the menu button closes the menu. Keyboard users should not be able to focus on the the menu button when the menu is open.

Reviewer: "Keyboard users should not be able to focus on the the menu button when the menu is open."

Why is that?   I've seen plenty of menu buttons where a user can use Shift + Tab to leave the exposed menu, which closes it, and focus returns to the invoking menu button.  That's not unexpected.

Author: That is kind of what I meant, but was totally unclear. Thank you for catching that. updated and expanded.

The `menu` role was set on the {{HTMLElement('ul')}}, identifying the `<ul>` element as a menu. 

The showing and hiding of the menu can be done with CSS. For example, in this code example with can use the attribute and adjacent sibling selectors to toggle the visibility of the menu:

```css
[role="menu"] { 
  display: none;
}
[aria-expanded="true"] + [role="menu"] {
  display: block;
}
```

> The `aria-label="Color: purple"` is set on the `menu` element. It defines the accessible name for the menu as "Text color: purple"; identifying the purpose of the menu (selecting a text color) and the current value (purple). When a selection to a new color is made, the value of the `aria-label` property should be updated as well.

Reviewer: `aria-label` doesn't match what the next sentence says is the accessible name "text color: purple".

This does seem a bit odd of a menu example, as it's being used to behave more like a combobox - where there's a label and a current value - than a menu, where the menu button more typically keeps a consistent accessible name.  

maybe if it was explained _why_ a menu was used instead of a combobox, that would be helpful?

Author: I updated. This example is a submenu, which I hadn't explained. I added a second, navigation example.  I have not used Combobox, so can't address that yet. Will research and write the Combobox page and then can either explain it better or delete it altogether ;)

  - ARIA roles
  - Menu role
  - composite widget role
---

> The `menu` role is a type of widget that offers a list of choices to the user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `menu` role is a type of composite widget that offers a list of choices to the user.
```

## Description

> A `menu` is often a group of common actions or functions that the user can invoke. The `menu` role is appropriate when a list of menu items is presented in a manner similar to a menu on a desktop application. Submenus, also known as pop-up menus, also have the role `menu`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `menu` is often represents a grouping of common actions or functions that the user can invoke. The `menu` role is appropriate when a list of menu items is presented in a manner similar to a menu on a desktop application. Submenus, also known as pop-up menus, also have the role `menu`.
```

> A `menu` widget is usually opened, or made visible, by activating a menu button, choosing an item in a menu that opens a sub menu, or by invoking a command, such as <kbd>Shift + F10</kbd> in Windows which opens a context specific menu. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `menu` widget is usually opened, or made visible, by activating a menu button, choosing an item in a menu that opens a submenu, or by invoking a command, such as <kbd>Shift + F10</kbd> in Windows which opens a context specific menu. 
```

> When a user activates a choice in a menu, the menu usually closes. If the menu choice action opens a submenu, the menu remains open as the submenu is opened. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a user activates a choice in a menu, the menu usually closes. If the menu choice action invokes a submenu, the menu will remain open and the submenu is displayed. 
```

When a menu opens, keyboard focus is placed on the first menu item. To be keyboard accessible, you need to [manage focus](https://usability.yale.edu/web-accessibility/articles/focus-keyboard-operability) for all descendants: all menu items within the `menu` are focusable. The menu button which opens the menu and the menu items, rather than the menu itself, are the focusable elements. 

Menu items include [`menuitem`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Roles/menuitem_role), [`menuitemcheckbox`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Roles/menuitemcheckbox_role), and [`menuitemradio`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Roles/menuitemradio_role). [Disabled](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Attributes/aria-disabled) menu items are focusable but cannot be activated. 

Menu items can be grouped in elements with the [`group`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Roles/group_role) role, and separated by elements with role [`separator`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Roles/separator_role). Neither `group` nor `separator` receive focus or are interactive. 

> If a `menu` is opened as a result of a context action, <kbd>Escape</kbd> or <kbd>Enter</kbd> may return focus to the invoking context. If focus was on the menu button, <kbd>Enter</kbd> opens the menu, giving focus to the first menu item. If focus is on the menu itself, <kbd>Escape</kbd> closes the menu and returns focus to the menubutton or parent menubar item (or the context action that opened the menu). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a `menu` is opened as a result of a context action, <kbd>Escape</kbd> or <kbd>Enter</kbd> may return focus to the invoking context. If focus was on the menu button, <kbd>Enter</kbd> opens the menu, giving focus to the first menu item. If focus is on the menu itself, <kbd>Escape</kbd> closes the menu and returns focus to the menu button or parent menubar item (or the context action that opened the menu). 
```

If the menu is visually persistent, consider the [`menubar`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Roles/menubar_role) instead. 

### Associated WAI-ARIA roles, states, and properties

- [`menuitem`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Roles/menuitem_role), [`menuitemcheckbox`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Roles/menuitemcheckbox_role), and [`menuitemradio`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Roles/menuitemradio_role) roles
  - : Roles of items contained in a containing `menu` or `menubar`, known collectively as "menu items". These must be able to receive focus.
- [`group`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Roles/group_role) role
  - :  Menu items can be nested in a [`group`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Roles/group_role) 
- [`separator`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Roles/separator_role) role
  - : A divider that separates and distinguishes sections of content or groups of menu items within the menu 

  
- {{HTMLAttrXref('tabindex')}} attribute

>   - : The `menu` container has tabindex set to -1 or 0 and each item in the menu has tabindex set to -1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - : The `menu` container has `tabindex` set to `-1` or `0` and each item in the menu has `tabindex` set to `-1`.
```

-  [`aria-activedescendant`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Attributes/aria-activedescendant) 
   - : Set to the ID of the focused item, if there is one.

> - [`aria-orientation`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Attributes/aria-orientation) 

Reviewer: worth mentioning that aria-orientation has gaps in support?

Author: Should be mentioned on the `aria-orientation` page, not here.

  - : indicates whether the menu orientation is horizontal or vertical; defaults to `vertical` if omitted.
- [`aria-label`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Attributes/aria-label) or [`aria-labelledby`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Attributes/aria-labelledby)
  - : The `menu` is required to have an accessible name.  Use `aria-labelledby` if a visible label is present, otherwise use `aria-label`. Either include the `aria-labelledby` set to a the `id` to the `menuitem` or `button` that controls its display or use `aria-label` to define the label.

> - [`aria-owns`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Attributes/aria-owns)

Reviewer: worth mentioning that Webkit does not support aria-owns?

  - : Only set on the menu container to include elements that are not DOM children of the container. If set, those elements will appear in the reading order in the sequence they are referenced and after any items that are DOM children. When managing focus, ensure the visual focus order matches this assistive technology reading order.

### Keyboard interactions

- <kbd>Space</kdb> / <kbd>Enter</kdb>	
  - : If the item is a parent menu item, opens submenu and moves focus to first item in the submenu. Otherwise, activates the menu item, which loads new content and places focus on the heading that titles the content.
- <kbd>Escape</kbd>	

>   - : When in a submenu, closes the submenu and moves focus to parent menubar item.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - : When in a submenu, closes the submenu and moves focus to parent menu or menubar item.
```

- <kbd>Right Arrow</kdb>	

>   - : Moves focus to the next item in the menubar. If focus is on the last item, moves focus to the first item. If in a submenu, if focus is on an item that does not have a submenu, closes the submenu and moves focus to next item in the menubar. Otherwise,opens submenu of newly focused menubar item, keeping focus on that parent menubar item.

Reviewer: the arrow key functionality seems to heavily lean on the idea that a menu exists inside of a menubar, which isn't always the case.

Author: added language that right and left arrows going from last to first item or first to last item, respectively, when not in a menubar is optional.

- <kbd>Left Arrow	</kdb>	
  - : Moves focus to the previous item in the menubar. If focus is on the first item, moves focus to the last item. If in a submenu, closes submenu and moves focus to parent menu item.
- <kbd>Down Arrow</kdb>	
  - : Opens submenu and moves focus to first item in the submenu.
- <kbd>Up Arrow</kdb>	
  - : Opens submenu and moves focus to last item in the submenu.
- <kbd>Home</kdb>	
  - : Moves focus to first item in the menubar.
- <kbd>End</kdb>	
  - : Moves focus to last item in the menubar.
- Any character key	
  - : Moves focus to next item in the menubar having a name that starts with the typed character. If none of the items have a name starting with the typed character, focus does not move.

## Examples

Below are two example menu implementations. 

### Example 1: navigation menu

```html
<div>
  <button id="menubutton" aria-haspopup="true" aria-controls="menu">

>     <img src="hamburger.svg" alt="Menu: Page Sections">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <img src="hamburger.svg" alt="Page Sections">
```

  </button>

>   <ul id="menu" role="menu" aria-labelledby="menubutton">

Reviewer: line 47 states that the menu/menuitems need tabindexes.  but those aren't used in this example.

Personally, if using this example I would like to see a note pointing to https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-practices-1.2/examples/disclosure/disclosure-navigation.html to indicate that if one is looking to implement a menu as a navigation, then it should be only done under very specific circumstances, and to otherwise defer to standard nav > link patterns.

## See Also

> - HTML {{HTMLElement('menu')}} element

Reviewer: while i realize firefox had implemented `menu` at one time in a way that reflects `role=menu`, that is no longer the case and `<menu>` is now nothing more than a type of `<ul>` element.  It may confuse people to continue to make this association since these have diverged?

If you do not agree, then pay me no mind :)
